RFD 0138 - Postgres backend storage (#28355)
gravitational/teleport: rfd/0138-postgres-backend.md

```pgsql
CREATE TABLE audit (
	event_time timestamp NOT NULL,
	audit_id uuid NOT NULL,
	event_type text NOT NULL,
	session_id uuid NOT NULL,
	event_data json NOT NULL,
	creation_time timestamp NOT NULL DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
	PRIMARY KEY (event_time, audit_id)
);
CREATE INDEX audit_session_id_idx ON audit (session_id, event_time, audit_id) WHERE session_id != '00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000';
CREATE INDEX audit_creation_time_idx ON audit (creation_time);
```

The database schema is made to be compatible with the one for the backend, although we are going to recommend storing the backend and the audit log in two different databases (having both on the same database cluster is going to be fine), because logical decoding is applied per-database, and keeping both in the same database will require the logical decoding plugin to do extra work to filter out the changes to the audit log.

The `audit_id` column is a UUID chosen at random at insert time, unrelated to the event data, only used to disambiguate events for the purpose of pagination; `creation_time`, likewise, is only used for deleting events after some retention period (defaulting to one year).

> With minor modifications, this schema can support range based partitioning by `event_time`, creating partitions by hand or using `pg_partman`. The initial implementation will not use partitioning, but setting up the table layout for it will allow for a much easier migration if and when we end up supporting it.

Author: Open question: should we set up a partitioned table with a single partition anyway, or is that something that can be handled at a later time? It should be possible to convert the table into a partitioned table with a single partition relatively quickly in a transaction, so it should be doable without downtime, but it's surely easier to do as we're setting up the schema for the first time

Author: Migrating from a single table to a partitioned table by renaming the original table is plenty fast, we can do it at a later time (if ever).

It's possible to only grant `INSERT` and `SELECT` privileges to the Teleport db user on the table that stores audit events, but not UPDATE or DELETE privileges; such a setup couldn't be automatically managed by Teleport, however, and thus would require detailed documentation on how to set up the schema, and some care.

For reliability, it's recommended to run a standby server with failover and synchronous replication (by setting `synchronous_standby_names`). The details on how to do this vary depending on the way Postgres is deployed; for instance, on Azure it's sufficient to enable ["High availability" mode](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/postgresql/flexible-server/concepts-high-availability).

> ### UX

Author: Open UX questions:
- which tunables should we expose? (delete batch size, expiry batch size, expiry interval, disable expiry loop, event poll interval, event batch size)
- the conn_string (as well as the rest of the pgx/pgxpool machinery) can use a password, either embedded or by reading it from the `~/.pgpass` file. Should we document that? Should we detect it and deliberately refuse to proceed with a password? What about TLS options such as `sslmode=verify-full`?
- should we require an option for the "change feed mode" even if we currently only support `wal2json` with the SQL interface? Requiring an option to be set might be better in the long term compared to having a default that we might deprecate in the future.

## Details

### Non-goals

We don't intend for this backend and audit log to be extensible to completely different RDBMS (such as MariaDB or Microsoft SQL Server); support for other Postgres-compatible databases (such as CockroachDB) should be possible in the future, but is not in scope for this RFD.

### General architecture of the backend

The Teleport backend abstraction consists of a key-value store (where both key and value are opaque bytestrings), with a per-item optional Time-To-Live (TTL), and a stream of changes to the data. As Postgres provides a way to fetch changes to the data over time through [logical decoding](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/logicaldecoding.html) of the Write-Ahead Log, we can tailor the database schema to the exact needs of the backend operations.

As such, the schema consists of a single `kv` table, defined as such:
```pgsql
CREATE TABLE kv (
    key bytea NOT NULL,
    value bytea NOT NULL,
    expires timestamptz,
    revision uuid NOT NULL,
    CONSTRAINT kv_pkey PRIMARY KEY (key)
);
CREATE INDEX kv_expires_idx ON kv (expires) WHERE expires IS NOT NULL;
```

> Each item in the backend is represented by a row in the `kv` table, with a `NULL` value for `expires` representing no expiration. To efficiently delete expired items, we keep a (partial) index on the expiration time. The `revision` column contains the revision for the upcoming opportunistic locking, and shall be set to a new unique value by the application code for every write (unfortunately, it's not a constraint that's expressible in SQL).

Reviewer: > and shall be set to a new unique value by the application code for every write (unfortunately, it's not a constraint that's expressible in SQL).

Can we use triggers? Just generate UUID inside the trigger and write it to the `revision` field on update.

Author: I really don't want to get into maintaining plpgsql functions if we don't have to. 😅

A trigger would absolutely work in the single item case, but we have Plans™ for multi-item write operations in which it seems it could be useful for all items written at once to have the same revision - you could accomodate that by only regenerating the revision if it's different from the previous one for updates, or by generating one if the code leaves at a sentinel default for inserts, but it seems more trouble than it's worth, tbh.

Using some deterministic function of the txid would also work but it wouldn't be safe against a dump/restore of the database - although now that I'm thinking about it, maybe something based on time and txid would work?

The `pg_logical_slot_get_changes` function (with the appropriate `wal2json` options) will return one entry per change, which maps nicely to the backend event model; updates and inserts will be rendered as `OpPut` events, deletes as `OpDelete` events.

### General architecture of the audit log

The database schema for the audit log will be composed of just an `events` table with the appropriate indexes for searching:

```pgsql
CREATE TABLE events (
    event_time timestamptz NOT NULL,
    event_id uuid NOT NULL,
    event_type text NOT NULL,
    session_id uuid NOT NULL,
    event_data json NOT NULL,
    creation_time timestamptz NOT NULL DEFAULT now(),
    CONSTRAINT events_pkey PRIMARY KEY (event_time, event_id)
);

> CREATE INDEX events_creation_time_idx ON events (creation_time);

Reviewer: Maybe look into using `brin` type of index (`CREATE INDEX events_creation_time_idx ON events USING BRIN (creation_time) WITH (pages_per_range=32);`? It might save a lot of index space and creation time is perfect type of data for this index type.

Author: Thank you for the advice, I'm switching the creation time index to BRIN.

The performance of event data cleanup doesn't matter much, so even the default `pages_per_range` (128) will probably work no matter what. Did you do some napkin math to pick 32 given the table layout?

CREATE INDEX events_search_session_events_idx ON events (session_id, event_time, event_id) WHERE session_id != '00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000'
```

> The database schema is made to be compatible with the one for the backend, although we are going to recommend storing the backend and the audit log in two different databases (having both on the same database cluster is going to be fine), because logical decoding is applied per-database, and keeping both in the same database will require the logical decoding plugin to do extra work to filter out the changes to the audit log.

Reviewer 2: Does it mean that we still need to take similar precautions about transaction sizes as above, or are audit log transactions guaranteed to be small enough?

Author: That's a very good point: logical decoding on a big database is going to take a long time even if the transaction doesn't involve tables that are filtered out; I think we're going to strongly discourage users from using the same database for both the backend and the audit log, and not accomodate sharing a database at all. I'll update the wording to reflect this.

### Requirements and recommendations

Any supported version of Postgres (11 to 15) should work, with `wal2json` 2.1 or later, although for better results, Postgres 13 or higher is recommended (as logical decoding had some internal improvements).

Because the db user that Teleport connects as needs `REPLICATION` permissions, which effectively grants read access to the entire database cluster, the backend should not be used in a database cluster that also contains data that the Teleport auth server should not have access to (it's fine to use a single cluster for the backend and the audit log storage, for instance).

Because of how temporary replication slots (and prepared statements) are tied to individual connections, the use of external connection poolers (such as `pgbouncer`) is not supported.

For self-managed Postgres setups we recommend the use of [certificate authentication](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/auth-cert.html); in Azure we support and recommend the use of Azure AD authentication over the use of hardcoded passwords.

> Teleport will attempt to create the databases specified in the configuration for itself, and set them up with the correct schema (as well as apply any future migrations, if needed). It's possible to create the databases manually and not give Teleport permissions to create databases, and technically it's even possible to manually set up the database schemas (to avoid granting Teleport the ability to create tables, for instance), but we recommend giving Teleport its own database for the backend - and since Teleport will need read-write access to all the data in it anyway, we also recommend letting Teleport manage the schema automatically.

Reviewer 3: If possible, we should require teleport be allowed to manage the schema... or at least not document the fact that a user-provided schema would work.  Seems like it'd be a real pain to maintain compatibility with externally managed schemas if we ever needed to migrate/fix something about the schema.

Author: The issue with that is that if Teleport has the ability to apply schema changes, it almost surely needs the ability to delete or update the events in the audit log - maybe we can require owner on the backend database and allow the user to restrict access to the events database?

> It's possible to only grant `INSERT` and `SELECT` privileges to the Teleport db user on the table that stores audit events, but not UPDATE or DELETE privileges; such a setup couldn't be automatically managed by Teleport, however, and thus would require detailed documentation on how to set up the schema, and some care.

Reviewer 2: Have you considered taking a hybrid approach, where the Teleport binary, run with a special setup command, performs everything for the ops person, and then, once ran in the production setup, can operate with lower privileges? (If it's a moot point because of the replication anyway, feel free to ignore this question.)

Author: Replication permissions only allow reading from the database cluster, and Teleport needs full read access over both the backend and the whole audit log anyway. I think I'd rather provide some shell script (or a list of commands to copy and paste?) that uses  `psql`, which can be more easily run on any computer - including, conveniently, the Azure cloud shell prompt.

Author: That being said, if the instructions end up being too onerous it's certainly a thing we could consider!

The `change_feed_*` options regulate the internal behavior of the change feed polling, the `expiry_*` and `disable_expiry` regulate the behavior of the TTL deletions. We're not expecting users to have to tweak these options (except maybe `disable_expiry` if TTL deletion is going to be run externally with `pg_cron` or similar methods), they're just exposed for performance tuning.

The `disable_cleanup`, `cleanup_interval` and `retention_period` options to the audit log are optional, and can be set and changed to support manual cleanup of old events, or to change the data retention period for the audit log. The default `retention_period` is one year (365.25 days).

### Rejected alternatives and future work

> Early tests with an in-database change feed mechanism (using a global, transactional counter to guarantee correct ordering of events in an `events` table) seemed to show that the performance was not up to the task, failing to sustain idle cluster operations for more than 3500 connected agents. It's possible that using some sharded counter would improve the performance of such an approach, but the added complexity in polling for such events makes it a less appealing option than just using logical decoding together with very simple operations on the data.

Reviewer 2: Are these 3500 agents connected directly to the DB server? From one of the conversations I had, I took that only the auth service has a direct database access, and all other nodes are talking to the DB through it. Did I get it wrong?

Author: That's right, the load test involved connecting a lot of Teleport agents (running the SSH service) to an appropriately-sized Teleport cluster - each agent, at a minimum, does one `KeepAlive` operation per minute to refresh its heartbeat.

The `pg_logical_slot_get_changes` function (with the appropriate `wal2json` options) will return one entry per change, which maps nicely to the backend event model; updates and inserts will be rendered as `OpPut` events, deletes as `OpDelete` events.

### General architecture of the audit log

The database schema for the audit log will be composed of just an `events` table with the appropriate indexes for searching:

```pgsql
CREATE TABLE events (
    event_time timestamptz NOT NULL,
    event_id uuid NOT NULL,
    event_type text NOT NULL,
    session_id uuid NOT NULL,

>     event_data json NOT NULL,

Reviewer: Btw, did you consider `jsonb`? For the price of a bit larger size we get ability to effectively search inside the event data, so depends on how much we value that ability to search inside.

Reviewer: > and I don't know how deep an attacker can end up controlling a rune in an audit message

We could inspect input json on error and check if it has NUL, replace and attempt rewrite 🤔

Author: I think that we could marshal the event to JSON and then blindly replace any occurrence of `\u0000` not preceded by a `\` with `\ufffd`; I don't think that the go json marshaler will ever emit a literal NUL and you can't ever have that sequence of characters outside of a string in any json value.

Author: I'm currently trying to figure out if the go json marshaler can ever output mismatched surrogate pairs, which would also be disallowed by `jsonb`, but regardless of that @fspmarshall pointed out that we might want to give ourselves the ability to change encoding away from JSON (and rely on the first character being `{` or something for old events lol) so I think I'm actually going to change the event data column to a completely opaque `bytea`.

Reviewer 4: > @tobiaszheller, in your postgres tests for the enhanced audit log you ended up using a separate JSONB column for just some select fields you wanted to search for, was that because a GIN index on the whole event data was too unwieldy? 

Yes, it was because of index size, there are events that had 400KB size.

Author: I'll leave it as text-mode `json`; the guarantee that the data is well-formed JSON is still useful, and it avoids the weirdness that comes from NULs, bad unicode and numerical coercion while still allowing for server-side filtering. If we want to add certain fields to some index we should do that on separate columns anyway because of what Tobiasz mentioned.

    creation_time timestamptz NOT NULL DEFAULT now(),
    CONSTRAINT events_pkey PRIMARY KEY (event_time, event_id)
);
CREATE INDEX events_creation_time_idx ON events USING brin (creation_time);

> CREATE INDEX events_search_session_events_idx ON events (session_id, event_time, event_id)

Reviewer 4: I think one more index will be needed for `SearchSessionEvents` endpoint. It is also used to search for all session ends without any session_id. And for some rbac check it's even used without start time (https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/d4805cc428ed37440031f8163fe5350bd1ab9ce4/lib/auth/auth_with_roles.go#L3661-L3664). I think it will result in full table scans on postgress. We discussed it some time ago for Athena, and decided that it won't be that much a problem there, however for postgress it should be addressed.

Reviewer 4: discussed it offline and it won't be issue because query with full range always has sessionid

With minor modifications, this schema can support range based partitioning by `event_time`, creating partitions by hand or using `pg_partman`. The initial implementation will not use partitioning, but setting up the table layout for it will allow for a much easier migration if and when we end up supporting it.

### Requirements and recommendations

Any supported version of Postgres (11 to 15) should work, with `wal2json` 2.1 or later, although for better results, Postgres 13 or higher is recommended (as logical decoding had some internal improvements).

Because the db user that Teleport connects as needs `REPLICATION` permissions, which effectively grants read access to the entire database cluster, the backend should not be used in a database cluster that also contains data that the Teleport auth server should not have access to (it's fine to use a single cluster for the backend and the audit log storage, for instance).

Because of how temporary replication slots (and prepared statements) are tied to individual connections, the use of external connection poolers (such as `pgbouncer`) is not supported.

> For self-managed Postgres setups we recommend the use of [certificate authentication](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/auth-cert.html); in Azure we support and recommend the use of Azure AD authentication over the use of hardcoded passwords.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For self-managed Postgres setups we recommend the use of [certificate authentication](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/auth-cert.html); in Azure we support and recommend the use of Entra ID authentication over the use of hardcoded passwords.
```

😅 sorry, couldn't help myself

## Details

WIP: the following is based on the implementation from the tip of `espadolini/pgbk2 `(`392c9ae5d51464bdf571cad249ea262b465217c8`) at the time of writing.

### Non-goals

We don't intend for this backend to be extensible to completely different RDBMS (such as MariaDB or Microsoft SQL Server); support for other Postgres-compatible databases (such as CockroachDB) should be possible in the future, but is not in scope for this RFD.

### General architecture

The Teleport backend abstraction consists of a key-value store (where both key and value are opaque bytestrings), with a per-item optional Time-To-Live (TTL), and a stream of changes to the data. As Postgres provides a way to fetch changes to the data over time through [logical decoding](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/logicaldecoding.html) of the Write-Ahead Log, we can tailor the database schema to the exact needs of the backend operations.

As such, the schema consists of a single `kv` table, defined as such:
```
CREATE TABLE kv (
    key bytea PRIMARY KEY,
    value bytea NOT NULL,
    expires timestamp,

>     rev uuid NOT NULL

Author: @xacrimon pointed out that we could use a `bigserial` here, and instead of generating UUIDs on the application side we could just set `rev = DEFAULT` in our writes, and have the new revision be `RETURNED` by the writes.

Author: Thinking about this a bit more, we can also make `rev` just a `bigint NOT NULL` and use `txid_current()` either as the default value or in the write queries.

Author: I'm not sure how well sequences (as implicitly used by `bigserial`) are preserved by database dumps and restores, but I don't believe that `txid_current()` is going to work correctly across database replicas or backups, so I think that the random UUID approach is still the better one.

Because of how temporary replication slots (and prepared statements) are tied to individual connections, the use of external connection poolers (such as `pgbouncer`) is not supported.

For self-managed Postgres setups we recommend the use of [certificate authentication](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/auth-cert.html); in Azure we support and recommend the use of Azure AD authentication over the use of hardcoded passwords.

Teleport will attempt to create the database specified in the configuration for itself, and set it up with the correct schema (as well as apply any future migrations, if needed). It's possible to create the database manually and not give Teleport permissions to create databases, and technically it's even possible to manually set up the database schema (to avoid granting Teleport the ability to create tables, for instance), but we recommend giving Teleport its own database for the backend - and since Teleport will need read-write access to all the data in it anyway, we also recommend letting Teleport manage the schema automatically.

### UX

> TBD, so far it's only a `conn_string` passed straight to `pgxpool` and a boolean `azure` flag with an optional `azure_client_id` string to select a specific identity if multiple are available.

Author: Open UX questions:
- which tunables should we expose? (delete batch size, expiry batch size, expiry interval, disable expiry loop, event poll interval, event batch size)
- the conn_string (as well as the rest of the pgx/pgxpool machinery) can use a password, either embedded or by reading it from the `~/.pgpass` file. Should we document that? Should we detect it and deliberately refuse to proceed with a password? What about TLS options such as `sslmode=verify-full`?
- should we require an option for the "change feed mode" even if we currently only support `wal2json` with the SQL interface? Requiring an option to be set might be better in the long term compared to having a default that we might deprecate in the future.
